5.8.12 LTS RNs.mdx (#1459)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: developer-support/release-notes/gateway.mdx

| [Go](https://go.dev/dl/)                                     | 1.24  |  1.24  | [Go plugins](/api-management/plugins/golang) must be built using Go 1.24 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | Used by Tyk Gateway | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)| v3.0.x                 | v3.0.x                 | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas) |

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

No deprications in this release.

#### Upgrade instructions

If you are upgrading to 5.8.12, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

#### Downloads

- [Docker image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-gateway/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.8.12)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-gateway:v5.8.12
    ``` 
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts v5.1.0](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart#5-1-0-release-notes)

> - [Source code tarball of Tyk Gateway v5.8.12](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/releases/tag/v5.8.12)
> 
> #### Changelog
> <a id="Changelog-v5.8.12" data-scroll-offset></a>
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 
> #### Changelog
> <a id="Changelog-v5.8.12" data-scroll-offset></a>
> 
> 
> 
> 
> ##### Fixed
> 
> <AccordionGroup>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed Path Matching Inconsistencies Between Classic and OAS API Middleware'>
> Resolved critical path matching inconsistencies that prevented OAS-specific middleware from executing correctly in scenarios that worked properly with Classic APIs. Fixed an issue where ValidateRequest and MockResponse middleware failed to trigger for subpaths (e.g., middleware configured for `/users` would not execute for `/users/123`), breaking feature parity with Classic API behavior. Resolved wildcard path matching problems where patterns like `/.*` or root paths `/` did not apply middleware to all endpoints as expected, preventing customers migrating from other API gateways from using global middleware configurations. Additionally, fixed mock response failures for child versions of OAS APIs and resolved middleware execution issues when APIs were accessed without trailing slashes. The fix implements a unified path matching algorithm that ensures OAS APIs use the same regex-based matching system as Classic APIs, providing consistent middleware behavior across all API types while maintaining full backward compatibility and regex flexibility.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Path Matching Inconsistencies Between Classic and OAS API Middleware'>
Resolved critical path matching inconsistencies that prevented Tyk OAS-specific middleware from executing correctly in scenarios that worked properly with Classic APIs.

- Fixed an issue where ValidateRequest and MockResponse middleware failed to trigger for subpaths (e.g., middleware configured for `/users` would not execute for `/users/123`), breaking feature parity with Classic API behavior.
- Resolved wildcard path matching problems where patterns like `/.*` or root paths `/` did not apply middleware to all endpoints as expected, preventing customers migrating from other API gateways from using global middleware configurations.
- Additionally, fixed mock response failures for child versions of OAS APIs and resolved middleware execution issues when APIs were accessed without trailing slashes.

The fix implements a unified path matching algorithm that ensures OAS APIs use the same regex-based matching system as Classic APIs, providing consistent middleware behavior across all API types while maintaining full backward compatibility and regex flexibility.
</Accordion>
```

<Accordion title='Fixed GeoIP Location Data Display in SQL Analytics Storage'>
Resolved issues preventing GeoIP location data from displaying correctly when using SQL storage for analytics. Previously, the Log Browser showed "GeoIP not recognized" for country codes, and geographic traffic filtering returned empty results, even though location data was properly captured and stored in the database. The Dashboard can now correctly read and display all geographic information, including country codes, city names, coordinates, and timezone data from SQL storage. Geographic traffic filtering by country code now works as expected, enabling users to analyze traffic patterns by location when using SQL-based analytics storage.

> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed GeoIP Location Data Display in SQL Analytics Storage'>
Resolved issues preventing GeoIP location data from displaying correctly when using SQL storage for analytics. Previously, the Log Browser showed "GeoIP not recognized" for country codes, and geographic traffic filtering returned empty results, even though location data was properly captured and stored in the database. 

The Dashboard can now correctly read and display all geographic information, including country codes, city names, coordinates, and timezone data from SQL storage. Geographic traffic filtering by country code now works as expected, enabling users to analyze traffic patterns by location when using SQL-based analytics storage.
</Accordion>
```

> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Improved JWKS Error Messaging for Faster JWT Troubleshooting'>
> Enhanced Gateway error logging for JWT authentication failures related to JWKS endpoints. Previously, JWKS configuration issues generated vague error messages that didn't indicate the root cause, making troubleshooting difficult and time-consuming. The Gateway now provides specific, actionable error messages that clearly identify whether failures stem from Base64 decoding issues, network connectivity problems, or invalid JWKS content.
> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed Gateway Panic if HashiCorp Vault Path Not Found'>
> Resolved an issue where the Gateway could crash with a panic if the API definition contained an illegal reference to a secret in HashiCorp Vault. If the requested path did not exist in Vault, this could cause the Gateway process to exit, resulting in a complete service outage during API loads, hot reloads, or Dashboard saves. The Gateway now gracefully handles the missing Vault path and logs a clear error message.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Improved JWKS Error Messaging for Faster JWT Troubleshooting'>
Enhanced Gateway error logging for JWT authentication failures related to JWKS endpoints. Previously, JWKS configuration issues generated vague error messages that didn't indicate the root cause, making troubleshooting difficult and time-consuming. 

The Gateway now provides specific, actionable error messages that clearly identify whether failures stem from Base64 decoding issues, network connectivity problems, or invalid JWKS content.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Gateway Panic if HashiCorp Vault Path Not Found'>
Resolved an issue where the Gateway could crash with a panic if the API definition contained an illegal reference to a secret in HashiCorp Vault. If the requested path did not exist in Vault, the Gateway process could exit, resulting in a complete service outage during API loads, hot reloads, or Dashboard saves. The Gateway now gracefully handles the missing Vault path and logs a clear error message.
</Accordion>
```

> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed Incomplete Validation of Multi-Value Request Headers'>
> Resolved an issue where Tyk only validated the first instance of multi-value headers when processing requests to Tyk OAS APIs, allowing invalid header values to bypass schema constraints. The Gateway now properly normalizes and validates all header values according to HTTP standards, ensuring that every value in multi-value headers complies with the defined OpenAPI schema constraints.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Incomplete Validation of Multi-Value Request Headers'>
Resolved an issue where Tyk only validated the first instance of multi-value headers when processing requests to Tyk OAS APIs, allowing invalid header values to bypass schema constraints. 

The Gateway now properly normalizes and validates all header values according to HTTP standards, ensuring that all values in multi-value headers comply with the defined OpenAPI schema constraints.
</Accordion>
```

> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed API Routing Issues with Custom Domains and Similar Listen Paths'>
> Resolved a routing issue where APIs could return `HTTP 404 Not Found` errors depending on custom domain settings, with differing behavior between Tyk OAS and Tyk Classic APIs. Previously, when APIs had similar listen path prefixes (e.g., `/caa` and `/caas2itsamu0456w2ayl9`), the Gateway's routing logic would incorrectly match requests, causing legitimate API calls to fail. The issue affected Tyk OAS APIs when custom domains were disabled and Tyk Classic APIs when custom domains were enabled. The Gateway now properly sorts and matches API specifications by listen path length, while correctly considering domain configuration options, ensuring all APIs are accessible via their configured paths regardless of custom domain settings or API type. 
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed API Routing Issues with Custom Domains and Similar Listen Paths'>
Resolved a routing issue where APIs could return `HTTP 404 Not Found` errors depending on custom domain settings, with differing behavior between Tyk OAS and Tyk Classic APIs. Previously, when APIs had similar listen path prefixes (e.g., `/caa` and `/caas2itsamu0456w2ayl9`), the Gateway's routing logic would incorrectly match requests, causing legitimate API calls to fail. The issue affected Tyk OAS APIs when custom domains were disabled, and Tyk Classic APIs when they were enabled. 

The Gateway now properly sorts and matches API specifications by listen path length, while correctly considering domain configuration options, ensuring all APIs are accessible via their configured paths regardless of custom domain settings or API type. 
</Accordion>
```

> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed Missing Request Duration Logging for Gateway Error Responses'>
> Resolved an issue where the Gateway incorrectly logged 0ms duration for error responses, including `HTTP 504 Gateway Timeout`, `HTTP 499 Client Closed Request`, and `HTTP 500 Internal Server Error`, creating gaps in API observability and monitoring. Previously, these error responses were hardcoded with zero latency values, making it impossible to determine actual processing time, gateway saturation, or connection utilization for failed requests. The Gateway now accurately calculates and logs the actual request duration from start to error occurrence for all error responses, providing complete timing visibility across successful and failed API requests. This enhancement improves observability for performance monitoring, capacity planning, and troubleshooting workflows.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Missing Request Duration Logging for Gateway Error Responses'>
Resolved an issue where the Gateway incorrectly logged 0ms duration for error responses, including `HTTP 504 Gateway Timeout`, `HTTP 499 Client Closed Request`, and `HTTP 500 Internal Server Error`, creating gaps in API observability and monitoring. Previously, these error responses were hardcoded with zero-latency values, making it impossible to determine the actual processing time, gateway saturation, or connection utilization for failed requests. 

The Gateway now accurately calculates and logs the actual request duration from start to error occurrence for all error responses, providing complete timing visibility across successful and failed API requests. This enhancement improves observability for performance monitoring, capacity planning, and troubleshooting workflows.
</Accordion>
```

> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed Missing Identity Source in OTEL Traces for JWT Protected APIs'>
> Resolved an issue where OpenTelemetry traces were missing the "alias" field when using JWT-protected APIs, making it impossible to identify API consumers in tracing data. Previously, while the alias was correctly populated in Redis sessions and pump metrics, it was not included in OTEL spans for JWT-authenticated requests. The Gateway now ensures that OTEL spans consistently include the alias attribute for all authentication methods, enabling proper consumer identification and request attribution in distributed tracing systems.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Missing Identity Source in OTEL Traces for JWT Protected APIs'>
Resolved an issue where OpenTelemetry traces were missing the "alias" field when using JWT-protected APIs, making it impossible to identify API consumers in tracing data. Previously, while the alias was correctly populated in Redis sessions and pump metrics, it was not included in OTEL spans for JWT-authenticated requests.

The Gateway now ensures that OTEL spans include the alias attribute for all authentication methods, enabling proper consumer identification and request attribution in distributed tracing systems.
</Accordion>
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Incorrect X-RateLimit-Reset Timestamp on First Request After Quota Initialization'>
Resolved an issue where the X-RateLimit-Reset header showed an incorrect timestamp on the first API request after rate limit or quota counter initialization. Previously, when quota windows expired and were reset within the distributed lock, the Gateway failed to update its local timestamp variable, causing the first request to return stale timing information while subsequent requests showed correct values. The Gateway now properly synchronizes its internal timer with the storage backend during quota window resets, ensuring that X-RateLimit-Reset headers accurately reflect the correct expiration time from the very first request.

> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Incorrect X-RateLimit-Reset Timestamp on First Request After Quota Initialization'>
Resolved an issue where the `X-RateLimit-Reset` header showed an incorrect timestamp on the first API request after rate limit or quota counter initialization. Previously, when quota windows expired and were reset within the distributed lock, the Gateway failed to update its local timestamp variable, causing the first request to return stale timing information while subsequent requests showed correct values.

The Gateway now properly synchronizes its internal timer with the storage backend during quota window resets, ensuring that `X-RateLimit-Reset` headers accurately reflect the correct expiration time from the very first request.
</Accordion>
```

<Accordion title='Fixed Certificate Re-use After Swapping in Multi-Auth Keys'>
Resolved an issue where swapping certificates in multi-auth (mTLS + Basic auth) keys prevented the original certificate from being reused. Previously, when updating a key's certificate, the original certificate remained incorrectly associated with the key internally, causing "key with given certificate already found" errors when attempting to reuse that certificate. Tyk now properly detaches certificates during key updates, allowing certificates to be freely reused across different keys after being removed from their original association.

> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Certificate Re-use After Swapping in Multi-Auth Keys'>
Resolved an issue where swapping certificates in multi-auth (mTLS + Basic auth) keys prevented the original certificate from being reused. Previously, when updating a key's certificate, the original certificate remained incorrectly associated with the key internally, causing "key with given certificate already found" errors when attempting to reuse that certificate.

Tyk now properly detaches certificates during key updates, allowing certificates to be freely reused across different keys after being removed from their original association.
</Accordion>
```

> </Accordion>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed OpenAPI multipleOf Validation for Floating-Point Numbers'>
> Resolved a floating-point precision issue in OpenAPI request validation where mathematically valid multipleOf values were incorrectly rejected due to binary representation limitations. Previously, when validating decimal numbers against multipleOf constraints (e.g., validating 2.3 against multipleOf: 0.1), the Gateway's validation logic would fail. The Gateway now properly handles floating-point precision in multipleOf validation, ensuring that all mathematically valid decimal multiples pass validation consistently while continuing to correctly reject invalid values.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed OpenAPI multipleOf Validation for Floating-Point Numbers'>
Resolved a floating-point precision issue in OpenAPI request validation where mathematically valid multipleOf values were incorrectly rejected due to binary representation limitations. Previously, when validating decimal numbers against multipleOf constraints (e.g., validating 2.3 against multipleOf: 0.1), the Gateway's validation logic would fail. 

The Gateway now properly handles floating-point precision in multipleOf validation, ensuring that all mathematically valid decimal multiples pass validation consistently while continuing to correctly reject invalid values.
</Accordion>
```

<Accordion title='Fixed SSL Certificate Loading from MDCB During Gateway Startup'>
Resolved an issue where data plane gateways failed to load SSL certificates from MDCB during startup, preventing HTTPS listeners from functioning correctly. The fix implements exponential backoff retry logic that waits for the MDCB connection to become available during certificate loading, ensuring SSL certificates are properly retrieved, and HTTPS listeners start correctly. This resolves startup failures for new data plane deployments using HTTPS
</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

> 
> ##### Security Fixes
> <AccordionGroup>
> 
> <Accordion title='Fixed Security Vulnerability in Dynamic mTLS Authentication'>
> The Gateway now enforces certificate presence for dynamic mTLS authentication by default, rejecting requests that provide only tokens without valid client certificates. A new configuration option `allow_unsafe_dynamic_mtls_token` has been added for backward compatibility, but defaults to `false` to ensure secure behavior. When enabled, this option restores the previous (insecure) behavior of accepting token-only authentication for dynamic mTLS APIs.
> </Accordion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Security Vulnerability in Dynamic mTLS Authentication'>
The Gateway now enforces certificate presence for dynamic mTLS authentication by default, rejecting requests that provide only tokens without valid client certificates. 

A new configuration option `allow_unsafe_dynamic_mtls_token` has been added for backward compatibility, but defaults to `false` to ensure secure behavior. When enabled, this option restores the previous (insecure) behavior of accepting token-only authentication for dynamic mTLS APIs.
</Accordion>
```

## 5.8 Release Notes

### 5.8.12 Release Notes

#### Release Date xx February 2026

#### Release Highlights

> In this release, we introduce unified path matching for OAS middleware, enabling wildcard and subpath support that brings feature parity with Classic APIs. Additionally, we have addressed several issues that improve API reliability, observability, and user experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this release, we have fixed some discrepancies in the path matching decision making for different middleware when using Tyk OAS APIs. This corrects a number of unexpected behaviors and ensures consistent application of the expected transformations and checks to API requests. We have also addressed several issues that improve API reliability, observability, and user experience.
```

For a comprehensive list of changes, please refer to the detailed [changelog](#Changelog-v5.8.12).

#### Breaking Changes

> There are no breaking changes in this release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A change has been made to improve security of the *Auth Token + Dynamic mTLS* method for securing access to APIs deployed on Tyk. This removes the option to authenticate using only the auth token and enforces the mTLS handshake.

Previously API clients could authenticate without presenting the client certificate or holding the client's private key.

For any user relying on that behavior, we have added a new Gateway configuration option: `allow_unsafe_dynamic_mtls_token`. Unless deliberately configured in the config file or environment, this is set to `false` to ensure that Tyk is secure by default.
```

#### Dependencies

##### Compatibility Matrix For Tyk Components

| Gateway Version | Recommended Releases | Backwards Compatibility |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| 5.8.12   | MDCB v2.9.0     | MDCB v2.9.0 |
|         | Operator v1.3.0 | Operator v0.17 |
|         | Sync v2.1.6    | Sync v2.1.1 |
|         | Helm Chart v5.1.0 | Helm all versions |
|         | Pump v1.14.0    | Pump all versions |

> |         | TIB (if using standalone) v1.7.0 | TIB all versions |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Not applicable to Gateway

##### 3rd Party Dependencies & Tools

| Third Party Dependency                                       | Tested Versions        | Compatible Versions    | Comments | 
| :------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------- | :---------------------- | :-------- | 
| [Go](https://go.dev/dl/)                                     | 1.24  |  1.24  | [Go plugins](/api-management/plugins/golang) must be built using Go 1.24 | 
| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | Used by Tyk Gateway | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)| v3.0.x                 | v3.0.x                 | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas) |

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

> No deprications in this release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No deprecations in this release.
```

#### Upgrade instructions

If you are upgrading to 5.8.12, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

#### Downloads

- [Docker image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-gateway/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.8.12)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-gateway:v5.8.12
    ``` 
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts v5.1.0](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart#5-1-0-release-notes)

- [Source code tarball of Tyk Gateway v5.8.12](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/releases/tag/v5.8.12)

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.8.12" data-scroll-offset></a>
##### Fixed

<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='Fixed Path Matching Inconsistencies Between Classic and OAS API Middleware'>

> Resolved critical path matching inconsistencies that prevented Tyk OAS-specific middleware from executing correctly in scenarios that worked properly with Classic APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved path matching inconsistencies that could lead to Tyk OAS-specific middleware not being executed when expected.
```

> - Fixed an issue where ValidateRequest and MockResponse middleware failed to trigger for subpaths (e.g., middleware configured for `/users` would not execute for `/users/123`), breaking feature parity with Classic API behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These inconsistencies could see the [Request Validation](/api-management/traffic-transformation/request-validation) and [Mock Response](/api-management/traffic-transformation/mock-response) middleware being skipped in certain scenarios when using Tyk OAS APIs.

These scenarios included:
- some subpaths, for example the middleware configured for `/users` would not execute for `/users/123`
- some child API versions
- wildcard regexes in paths
- root paths

Now Tyk will apply the same decisions for these middleware as for the rest of the request processing chain.
```

> - Resolved wildcard path matching problems where patterns like `/.*` or root paths `/` did not apply middleware to all endpoints as expected, preventing customers migrating from other API gateways from using global middleware configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - Additionally, fixed mock response failures for child versions of OAS APIs and resolved middleware execution issues when APIs were accessed without trailing slashes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> The fix implements a unified path matching algorithm that ensures OAS APIs use the same regex-based matching system as Classic APIs, providing consistent middleware behavior across all API types while maintaining full backward compatibility and regex flexibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed GeoIP Location Data Display in SQL Analytics Storage'>

Reviewer 2: This is a Dashboard fix -> please move to Dashboard RN

The Gateway now properly normalizes and validates all header values according to HTTP standards, ensuring that all values in multi-value headers comply with the defined OpenAPI schema constraints.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed API Routing Issues with Custom Domains and Similar Listen Paths'>
Resolved a routing issue where APIs could return `HTTP 404 Not Found` errors depending on custom domain settings, with differing behavior between Tyk OAS and Tyk Classic APIs. Previously, when APIs had similar listen path prefixes (e.g., `/caa` and `/caas2itsamu0456w2ayl9`), the Gateway's routing logic would incorrectly match requests, causing legitimate API calls to fail. The issue affected Tyk OAS APIs when custom domains were disabled, and Tyk Classic APIs when they were enabled. 

The Gateway now properly sorts and matches API specifications by listen path length, while correctly considering domain configuration options, ensuring all APIs are accessible via their configured paths regardless of custom domain settings or API type. 
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Missing Request Duration Logging for Gateway Error Responses'>

> Resolved an issue where the Gateway incorrectly logged 0ms duration for error responses, including `HTTP 504 Gateway Timeout`, `HTTP 499 Client Closed Request`, and `HTTP 500 Internal Server Error`, creating gaps in API observability and monitoring. Previously, these error responses were hardcoded with zero-latency values, making it impossible to determine the actual processing time, gateway saturation, or connection utilization for failed requests. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where the Gateway incorrectly logged 0ms duration for error responses, including `HTTP 504 Gateway Timeout`, `HTTP 499 Client Closed Request`, and `HTTP 500 Internal Server Error`, creating gaps in API observability and monitoring.
```

The Gateway now accurately calculates and logs the actual request duration from start to error occurrence for all error responses, providing complete timing visibility across successful and failed API requests. This enhancement improves observability for performance monitoring, capacity planning, and troubleshooting workflows.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Missing Identity Source in OTEL Traces for JWT Protected APIs'>
Resolved an issue where OpenTelemetry traces were missing the "alias" field when using JWT-protected APIs, making it impossible to identify API consumers in tracing data. Previously, while the alias was correctly populated in Redis sessions and pump metrics, it was not included in OTEL spans for JWT-authenticated requests.

The Gateway now ensures that OTEL spans include the alias attribute for all authentication methods, enabling proper consumer identification and request attribution in distributed tracing systems.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Intermittent NewRelic Tracing'>

> Resolved an issue where NewRelic OpenTracing integration worked inconsistently in Tyk Gateway. The Gateway now properly mounts NewRelic middleware on all routers, including reused ones, with thread-safe duplicate prevention and improved memory management during router swaps. This fix ensures consistent NewRelic APM visibility across all API calls and gateway versions, supporting both legacy NewRelic configurations and newer OpenTelemetry collector setups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where NewRelic OpenTracing integration worked inconsistently in Tyk Gateway. The Gateway now properly mounts NewRelic middleware on all routers, including reused ones, with thread-safe duplicate prevention and improved memory management during router swaps. This fix ensures consistent generation of traces when using the legacy NewRelic OpenTracing observability approach.
```

</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed Incorrect X-RateLimit-Reset Timestamp on First Request After Quota Initialization'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Incorrect X-RateLimit-Reset Timestamp>
```

> Resolved an issue where the `X-RateLimit-Reset` header showed an incorrect timestamp on the first API request after rate limit or quota counter initialization. Previously, when quota windows expired and were reset within the distributed lock, the Gateway failed to update its local timestamp variable, causing the first request to return stale timing information while subsequent requests showed correct values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where the `X-RateLimit-Reset` header showed an incorrect timestamp in the response to the first API request after rate limit or quota counter initialization. Previously, when quota windows expired and were reset within the distributed lock, the Gateway would return stale timing information in the first response.
```

> The Gateway now properly synchronizes its internal timer with the storage backend during quota window resets, ensuring that `X-RateLimit-Reset` headers accurately reflect the correct expiration time from the very first request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Gateway now properly synchronizes its internal timer with the storage backend during quota window resets, ensuring that `X-RateLimit-Reset` headers accurately reflect the correct expiration time from the very first response.
```

</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed Certificate Re-use After Swapping in Multi-Auth Keys'>

Reviewer 2: Let's include this just in Dashboard, not Gateway change log

Resolved an issue where swapping certificates in multi-auth (mTLS + Basic auth) keys prevented the original certificate from being reused. Previously, when updating a key's certificate, the original certificate remained incorrectly associated with the key internally, causing "key with given certificate already found" errors when attempting to reuse that certificate.

Tyk now properly detaches certificates during key updates, allowing certificates to be freely reused across different keys after being removed from their original association.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed OpenAPI multipleOf Validation for Floating-Point Numbers'>

> Resolved a floating-point precision issue in OpenAPI request validation where mathematically valid multipleOf values were incorrectly rejected due to binary representation limitations. Previously, when validating decimal numbers against multipleOf constraints (e.g., validating 2.3 against multipleOf: 0.1), the Gateway's validation logic would fail. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved a floating-point precision issue where mathematically valid multipleOf values were incorrectly rejected due to binary representation limitations. This could cause incorrect failures when performing Request Validation for Tyk OAS APIs.
```

The Gateway now properly handles floating-point precision in multipleOf validation, ensuring that all mathematically valid decimal multiples pass validation consistently while continuing to correctly reject invalid values.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed SSL Certificate Loading from MDCB During Gateway Startup'>

> Resolved an issue where data plane gateways failed to load SSL certificates from MDCB during startup, preventing HTTPS listeners from functioning correctly. The fix implements exponential backoff retry logic that waits for the MDCB connection to become available during certificate loading, ensuring SSL certificates are properly retrieved, and HTTPS listeners start correctly. This resolves startup failures for new data plane deployments using HTTPS

Reviewer 2: There are new configuration options added for this, to control the exponential backoff (now added to the Jira)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where a startup timing issue could cause Data Plane Gateways not to load TLS certificates from MDCB, preventing HTTPS listeners from functioning correctly. We have implemented an optional exponential backoff retry logic that waits for the MDCB connection to become available during certificate loading, ensuring that certificates are now properly retrieved, and HTTPS listeners start correctly.

The retry mechanism is enabled by default and controlled using [`slave_options.rpc_cert_fetch_retry_enabled`](https://tyk.io/docs/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#slave_options-rpc_cert_fetch_retry_enabled). Set this to `false` to turn off the retry mechanism. The retry uses sensible defaults but can be optimised for a specific deployment using new parameters added to the Data Plane Gateway config.

</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

##### Security Fixes
<AccordionGroup>

<Accordion title='Fixed Security Vulnerability in Dynamic mTLS Authentication'>

> The Gateway now enforces certificate presence for dynamic mTLS authentication by default, rejecting requests that provide only tokens without valid client certificates. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Gateway now enforces the mutual TLS handshake when an API is secured using Auth Token with Dynamic mTLS. The client must therefore present a valid client certificate in the request. Previously Dynamic mTLS would permit authentication using only the Auth Token and the mTLS handshake was not enforced.

A new configuration option `allow_unsafe_dynamic_mtls_token` has been added for any users relying on the legacy behavior. This defaults to `false`.
```

> A new configuration option `allow_unsafe_dynamic_mtls_token` has been added for backward compatibility, but defaults to `false` to ensure secure behavior. When enabled, this option restores the previous (insecure) behavior of accepting token-only authentication for dynamic mTLS APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new Gateway configuration option `allow_unsafe_dynamic_mtls_token` has been added for backward compatibility, but defaults to `false` to ensure secure behavior. When enabled, this option restores the previous (insecure) behavior of accepting token-only authentication for APIs secured with Auth Token + Dynamic mTLS.
```

| [Redis](https://redis.io/download/)  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | 6.2.x, 7.x  | Used by Tyk Gateway | 
| [OpenAPI Specification](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.3)| v3.0.x                 | v3.0.x                 | Supported by [Tyk OAS](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas) |

Given the potential time difference between your upgrade and the release of this version, we recommend users verify the ongoing support of third-party dependencies they install, as their status may have changed since the release.

#### Deprecations

No deprications in this release.

#### Upgrade instructions

If you are upgrading to 5.8.12, please follow the detailed [upgrade instructions](#upgrading-tyk).

#### Downloads

- [Docker image to pull](https://hub.docker.com/r/tykio/tyk-gateway/tags?page=&page_size=&ordering=&name=v5.8.12)
  - ```bash
    docker pull tykio/tyk-gateway:v5.8.12
    ``` 
- Helm charts
  - [tyk-charts v5.1.0](/developer-support/release-notes/helm-chart#5-1-0-release-notes)

- [Source code tarball of Tyk Gateway v5.8.12](https://github.com/TykTechnologies/tyk/releases/tag/v5.8.12)

#### Changelog
<a id="Changelog-v5.8.12" data-scroll-offset></a>

##### Added

<AccordionGroup>

> <Accordion title='Unified Path Matching Algorithm for OAS Middleware'>

Reviewer 2: Please move this to fixes and word it as a bug fix (which is what it is)

> Implemented a unified path matching algorithm that ensures consistent behavior between Classic and OAS APIs across all middleware. Previously, OAS-specific middleware (ValidateRequest, MockResponse) used Gorilla Mux for exact path matching only, while Classic APIs used regex-based matching that supported subpaths and wildcards. The Gateway now compiles OAS middleware operations into the same RxPaths system used by Classic APIs, enabling full regex flexibility, wildcard support, and consistent subpath matching behavior across all API types and middleware configurations.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we really need to give all this technical/implementation detail but we can mention the things that have been fixed by this work, including:
- mock responses for child APIs
- middleware with trailing slashes, etc
- wildcard path matching with validate request

Resolved issues preventing GeoIP location data from displaying correctly when using SQL storage for analytics. Previously, the Log Browser showed "GeoIP not recognized" for country codes, and geographic traffic filtering returned empty results, even though location data was properly captured and stored in the database. The Dashboard can now correctly read and display all geographic information, including country codes, city names, coordinates, and timezone data from SQL storage. Geographic traffic filtering by country code now works as expected, enabling users to analyze traffic patterns by location when using SQL-based analytics storage.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Improved JWKS Error Messaging for Faster JWT Troubleshooting'>
Enhanced Gateway error logging for JWT authentication failures related to JWKS endpoints. Previously, JWKS configuration issues generated vague error messages that didn't indicate the root cause, making troubleshooting difficult and time-consuming. The Gateway now provides specific, actionable error messages that clearly identify whether failures stem from Base64 decoding issues, network connectivity problems, or invalid JWKS content.
</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed Gateway Panic with Missing Vault Paths in API Definitions'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Gateway Panic if HashiCorp Vault Path Not Found'>
```

> Resolved an issue where the Gateway would crash with a panic when API definitions contained `vault://` references, but the required Vault path (`secret/data/tyk-apis`) did not exist. Previously, this configuration error caused the entire Gateway process to exit, resulting in a complete service outage during API loads, hot reloads, or Dashboard saves. The Gateway now gracefully handles missing Vault paths by logging a clear error message and continuing to operate normally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where the Gateway could crash with a panic if the API definition contained an illegal reference to a secret in HashiCorp Vault. If the requested path did not exist in Vault, this could cause the Gateway process to exit, resulting in a complete service outage during API loads, hot reloads, or Dashboard saves. The Gateway now gracefully handles the missing Vault path and logs a clear error message.
```

</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed Incomplete Validation of Multi-Value HTTP Headers in OAS APIs'>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Accordion title='Fixed Incomplete Validation of Multi-Value Request Headers'>
```

> Resolved an issue where Tyk's OpenAPI request validation only checked the first instance of multi-value headers, allowing invalid header values to bypass schema constraints. Previously, when multiple headers with the same name were sent or when header values were provided in different orders, only the first header was validated against the OpenAPI schema, creating a validation loophole. The Gateway now properly normalizes and validates all header values according to HTTP standards, ensuring that every value in multi-value headers complies with the defined OpenAPI schema constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where Tyk only validated the first instance of multi-value headers when processing requests to Tyk OAS APIs, allowing invalid header values to bypass schema constraints. The Gateway now properly normalizes and validates all header values according to HTTP standards, ensuring that every value in multi-value headers complies with the defined OpenAPI schema constraints.
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed API Routing Issues with Custom Domains and Similar Listen Paths'>

> Resolved a routing issue where APIs returned 404 Not Found errors despite being properly configured, with different behaviors between Classic and OAS APIs depending on custom domain settings. Previously, when APIs had similar listen path prefixes (e.g., `/caa` and `/caas2itsamu0456w2ayl9`), the Gateway's routing logic would incorrectly match requests, causing legitimate API calls to fail. The issue affected OAS APIs when custom domains were disabled and Classic APIs when custom domains were enabled. The Gateway now properly sorts and matches API specifications by listen path length while correctly considering domain configuration options, ensuring all APIs are accessible via their configured paths regardless of custom domain settings or API type. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved a routing issue where APIs could return `HTTP 404 Not Found` errors depending on custom domain settings, with differing behavior between Tyk OAS and Tyk Classic APIs. Previously, when APIs had similar listen path prefixes (e.g., `/caa` and `/caas2itsamu0456w2ayl9`), the Gateway's routing logic would incorrectly match requests, causing legitimate API calls to fail. The issue affected Tyk OAS APIs when custom domains were disabled and Tyk Classic APIs when custom domains were enabled. The Gateway now properly sorts and matches API specifications by listen path length, while correctly considering domain configuration options, ensuring all APIs are accessible via their configured paths regardless of custom domain settings or API type. 
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Missing Request Duration Logging for Gateway Error Responses'>

> Resolved an issue where the Gateway incorrectly logged 0ms duration for error responses, including 504 Gateway Timeout, 499 Client Closed Request, and 500 Internal Server Error, creating gaps in API observability and monitoring. Previously, these error responses were hardcoded with zero latency values, making it impossible to determine actual processing time, gateway saturation, or connection utilization for failed requests. The Gateway now accurately calculates and logs the actual request duration from start to error occurrence for all error responses, providing complete timing visibility across successful and failed API requests. This enhancement improves observability for performance monitoring, capacity planning, and troubleshooting workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where the Gateway incorrectly logged 0ms duration for error responses, including `HTTP 504 Gateway Timeout`, `HTTP 499 Client Closed Request`, and `HTTP 500 Internal Server Error`, creating gaps in API observability and monitoring. Previously, these error responses were hardcoded with zero latency values, making it impossible to determine actual processing time, gateway saturation, or connection utilization for failed requests. The Gateway now accurately calculates and logs the actual request duration from start to error occurrence for all error responses, providing complete timing visibility across successful and failed API requests. This enhancement improves observability for performance monitoring, capacity planning, and troubleshooting workflows.
```

</Accordion>

> <Accordion title='Fixed Mock Response Middleware for Versioned OAS APIs'>

Reviewer 2: This is covered by the path matching fix

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Incorrect X-RateLimit-Reset Timestamp on First Request After Quota Initialization'>
Resolved an issue where the X-RateLimit-Reset header showed an incorrect timestamp on the first API request after rate limit or quota counter initialization. Previously, when quota windows expired and were reset within the distributed lock, the Gateway failed to update its local timestamp variable, causing the first request to return stale timing information while subsequent requests showed correct values. The Gateway now properly synchronizes its internal timer with the storage backend during quota window resets, ensuring that X-RateLimit-Reset headers accurately reflect the correct expiration time from the very first request.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Certificate Re-use After Swapping in Multi-Auth Keys'>

> Resolved an issue where swapping certificates in multi-auth (mTLS + Basic auth) keys prevented the original certificate from being reused. Previously, when updating a key's certificate, the original certificate remained incorrectly associated with the key internally, causing "key with given certificate already found" errors when attempting to reuse that certificate. The Gateway now properly detaches certificates during key updates, allowing certificates to be freely reused across different keys after being removed from their original association.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Resolved an issue where swapping certificates in multi-auth (mTLS + Basic auth) keys prevented the original certificate from being reused. Previously, when updating a key's certificate, the original certificate remained incorrectly associated with the key internally, causing "key with given certificate already found" errors when attempting to reuse that certificate. Tyk now properly detaches certificates during key updates, allowing certificates to be freely reused across different keys after being removed from their original association.
```

</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed OpenAPI multipleOf Validation for Floating-Point Numbers'>
Resolved a floating-point precision issue in OpenAPI request validation where mathematically valid multipleOf values were incorrectly rejected due to binary representation limitations. Previously, when validating decimal numbers against multipleOf constraints (e.g., validating 2.3 against multipleOf: 0.1), the Gateway's validation logic would fail. The Gateway now properly handles floating-point precision in multipleOf validation, ensuring that all mathematically valid decimal multiples pass validation consistently while continuing to correctly reject invalid values.
</Accordion>

<Accordion title='Fixed Path Matching Issues for OAS API Middleware'>

> Resolved multiple path matching inconsistencies between Classic and OAS APIs that prevented middleware from executing correctly. Fixed an issue where wildcard path matching (`/.*` or `blank paths`) did not work for ValidateRequest and MockResponse middleware in OAS APIs, preventing customers from applying middleware to entire APIs as they could with Classic APIs. Additionally, resolved an issue where middleware configured for the root path (`/`) failed to execute when OAS APIs were called without a trailing slash (e.g., `/httpbin` instead of `/httpbin/`), while the same configuration worked correctly for Classic APIs. These fixes were implemented through a unified path matching algorithm that ensures consistent middleware behavior across all API types and path configurations.

Reviewer 2: This is all covered by the path matching fix
